OCPBUGS#10640: Added clarification point to disk partition BM doc (#67707)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/installation-user-infra-machines-advanced.adoc

[id="installation-user-infra-machines-advanced_disk_{context}"]
== Disk partitioning

The disk partitions are created on {product-title} cluster nodes during the {op-system-first} installation. Each {op-system} node of a particular architecture uses the same partition layout, unless the default partitioning configuration is overridden. During the {op-system} installation, the size of the root file system is increased to use the remaining available space on the target device.

[IMPORTANT]
====

> The use of a custom partition scheme on your node could result in {product-title} not monitoring or alerting on some node partitions. If you are overriding the default partitioning, see link:https://access.redhat.com/articles/4766521[Understanding OpenShift File System Monitoring (eviction conditions)] for more information about how {product-title} monitors your host file systems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The use of a custom partition scheme on your node could result in {product-title} not monitoring or alerting on some node partitions. If you override the default partitioning, see link:https://access.redhat.com/articles/4766521[Understanding OpenShift File System Monitoring (eviction conditions)] for more information about how {product-title} monitors your host file systems.
```

====

{product-title} monitors the following two filesystem identifiers:

* `nodefs`, which is the filesystem that contains `/var/lib/kubelet`
* `imagefs`, which is the filesystem that contains `/var/lib/containers`

For the default partition scheme, `nodefs` and `imagefs` monitor the same root filesystem, `/`.

> If you want to override the default partitioning when installing {op-system} on an {product-title} cluster node, you must create separate partitions. You might want to add a separate storage partition for your containers and container images. For example, by mounting `/var/lib/containers` in a separate partition, the kubelet separately monitor `/var/lib/containers` as the `imagefs` directory and the root file system as the `nodefs` directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To override the default partitioning when installing {op-system} on an {product-title} cluster node, you must create separate partitions. You might want to add a separate storage partition for your containers and container images. For example, by mounting `/var/lib/containers` in a separate partition, the kubelet separately monitors `/var/lib/containers` as the `imagefs` directory and the root file system as the `nodefs` directory.
```

The disk partitions are created on {product-title} cluster nodes during the {op-system-first} installation. Each {op-system} node of a particular architecture uses the same partition layout, unless the default partitioning configuration is overridden. During the {op-system} installation, the size of the root file system is increased to use the remaining available space on the target device.

> Kubernetes supports monitoring `/var/lib/containers` when mounted in the same partition as `/var` or a separate partition. 

Reviewer 2: Remove that sentence; it provides no value / information. Instead:

```
Red Hat OpenShift Container Platform monitors two different filesystem identifiers:
* nodefs - the filesystem which contains /var/lib/kubelet
* imagefs - the filesystem which contains /var/lib/containers

With the default partition scheme, nodefs and imagefs monitor the same filesystem (i.e., the root filesystem `/`).
```

Author: Thanks, Andreas. @djuran , would you be OK with me removing this sentence and replacing it with Andreas' recommendation?

Reviewer 3: Yes, @andreaskaris suggestion looks correct

Author: Thanks, David.

@andreaskaris . Updated to: 

> Red Hat {product-title} monitors the following two filesystem identifiers:

* `nodefs`: the filesystem that contains `/var/lib/kubelet`
* `imagefs`: the filesystem that contains `/var/lib/containers`

For the default partition scheme, `nodefs` and `imagefs` monitor the same root filesystem, `/`.

There are two cases where you might want to override the default partitioning when installing {op-system} on an {product-title} cluster node:

> * Creating separate partitions: For greenfield installations on an empty disk, you might want to add separate storage to a partition. For example, mount `/var/lib/containers` in a separate partition, so that kubelet can monitor the `imagefs` directory for container runtimes,`/var/lib/containers` and the `nodefs` directory for root directory files.

Reviewer 2: The above is confusing, better:

```
* Creating separate partitions: For greenfield installations on an empty disk, you might want to add a separate storage partition for your containers and container images. For example, by mounting `/var/lib/containers` in a separate partition, the kubelet will separately monitor `/var/lib/containers` as the `imagefs`. And it will monitor the root file system as the `nodefs`.
```

Reviewer 3: Agree, the original phrasing is confusing and the one suggested by @andreaskaris is better.  
I would in addition drop the part about greenfield and empty disk. When do we ever deploy OpenShift to a Node which does not have an empty disk? Do if we even support such a model, and what would this disk then contain?

Author: Thanks, @andreaskaris and @djuran. How about:

> Creating separate partitions: You might want to add a separate storage partition for your containers and container images. For example, by mounting `/var/lib/containers` in a separate partition, the kubelet will separately monitor `/var/lib/containers` as the `imagefs` directory and the root file system as the `nodefs` directory.

Author: Thanks, @djuran . Removed. I moved the following IMPORTANT note closer to the intro paragraph: 

![Screenshot from 2024-03-12 10-50-54](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/assets/57954076/3886faec-febe-44ad-9b10-7cd28bd6eb25)

+
[IMPORTANT]
====
If you resized your disk size to host a larger file system, consider creating a separate `/var/lib/containers` partition. This is important for a disk formatted to `xfs`, where a high number of allocation groups might cause CPU time issues.
====

* Retaining existing partitions: For a brownfield installation where you are reinstalling {product-title} on an existing node and want to retain data partitions installed from your previous operating system, use boot arguments and options with the `coreos-installer` command so that you can keep existing data partitions.
+
[IMPORTANT]
====

> The use of a custom partition for mounting ` /var/lib/containers` could result in the partition from not being monitored by {product-title} or alerted on. If you are overriding the default partitioning, see link:https://access.redhat.com/articles/4766521[Understanding OpenShift File System Monitoring (eviction conditions)] for more information about how {product-title} monitors your host file systems.

Reviewer 2: That sentence is wrong. The kubelet will always monitor the partition that contains /var/lib/containers. It will always monitor the partition that contains /var/lib/kubelet.

Instead:
```
The use of a custom partition scheme on your node could result some partitions of your node from not being monitored by {product-title} or alerted on. If you are overriding the default partitioning, see link:https://access.redhat.com/articles/4766521[Understanding OpenShift File System Monitoring (eviction conditions)] for more information about how {product-title} monitors your host file systems.
```

Author: Thanks, Andreas. Updated.

@djuran . Are you OK with this update?

Reviewer 3: The phrase ` result in some partitions of your node from not being monitored ' doesn't sound right
But I'm not a native-english-speaker, so what do I know

Reviewer 3: @andreaskaris knows this much better than me but from my limited knowledge,  it looks correct

Kubernetes supports monitoring `/var/lib/containers` when mounted in the same partition as `/var` or a separate partition. 

There are two cases where you might want to override the default partitioning when installing {op-system} on an {product-title} cluster node:

* Creating separate partitions: For greenfield installations on an empty disk, you might want to add separate storage to a partition. For example, mount `/var/lib/containers` in a separate partition, so that kubelet can monitor the `imagefs` directory for container runtimes,`/var/lib/containers` and the `nodefs` directory for root directory files.
+
[IMPORTANT]
====
If you resized your disk size to host a larger file system, consider creating a separate `/var/lib/containers` partition. This is important for a disk formatted to `xfs`, where a high number of allocation groups might cause CPU time issues.
====

> // https://linux.die.net/man/5/xfs

Author: Hi @andreaskaris and @kannon92 , can I remove:

// https://linux.die.net/man/5/xfs
// https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/node-pressure-eviction/

They are commented out, but I'm not sure if they hold value and should be provided as links in the doc. Please let me know.

Reviewer 4: I think so. I found it confusing also.

Author: Thanks, Removed.

// https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/node-pressure-eviction/

* Retaining existing partitions: For a brownfield installation where you are reinstalling {product-title} on an existing node and want to retain data partitions installed from your previous operating system, use boot arguments and options with the `coreos-installer` command so that you can keep existing data partitions.
+
[IMPORTANT]
====
The use of a custom partition for mounting ` /var/lib/containers` could result in the partition from not being monitored by {product-title} or alerted on. If you are overriding the default partitioning, see link:https://access.redhat.com/articles/4766521[Understanding OpenShift File System Monitoring (eviction conditions)] for more information about how {product-title} monitors your host file systems.
====

[IMPORTANT]
====

> For disk sizes larger than 100GB, and especially disk sizes larger than 1TB, create a separate `/var` partition. See "Creating a separate `/var` partition" and this link:https://access.redhat.com/solutions/5587281[Red Hat Knowledgebase article] for more information.

Reviewer 4: I don't really have the context for why this was in here. I'd leave it honestly.

> For disk sizes larger than 100GB, and especially disk sizes larger than 1TB, create a separate `/var` partition. See "Creating a separate `/var` partition" and this link:https://access.redhat.com/solutions/5587281[Red Hat Knowledgebase article] for more information.

Author: Thanks, I'll leave this note in place to be safe.

> For disk sizes larger than 100GB, and especially disk sizes larger than 1TB, create a separate `/var` partition. See "Creating a separate `/var` partition" and this link:https://access.redhat.com/solutions/5587281[Red Hat Knowledgebase article] for more information.

Reviewer 3: To me, this very much look a legacy advice, where do you find a disk smaller than 100 GB in the past decade or so.  
If we can't trace the origin of the note through git history and we can't motivate why it should be this way, I suggest the note should be removed.

> For disk sizes larger than 100GB, and especially disk sizes larger than 1TB, create a separate `/var` partition. See "Creating a separate `/var` partition" and this link:https://access.redhat.com/solutions/5587281[Red Hat Knowledgebase article] for more information.

Reviewer 5: it was added at the request of the CoreOS team, you can find more information on the upstream issue [here](https://github.com/coreos/fedora-coreos-tracker/issues/1183#issuecomment-1107857954). @control-d might be able to say whether this note is still needed or if it can be removed. my suggestion is to keep it, as this seemed to be such a common issue customers were running into

> For disk sizes larger than 100GB, and especially disk sizes larger than 1TB, create a separate `/var` partition. See "Creating a separate `/var` partition" and this link:https://access.redhat.com/solutions/5587281[Red Hat Knowledgebase article] for more information.

Reviewer 3: reading the original [issue](https://github.com/coreos/fedora-coreos-tracker/issues/1183#issuecomment-1107857954), it refers to https://github.com/coreos/fedora-coreos-config/pull/2320 which supposedly solves the problem.  
And indeed, checking an OCP 4.14.5 Node I had, with a 828 GB root disk, the `agcount` was only 4. Which suggests that the problem for which this suggestion was created has been resolved

> For disk sizes larger than 100GB, and especially disk sizes larger than 1TB, create a separate `/var` partition. See "Creating a separate `/var` partition" and this link:https://access.redhat.com/solutions/5587281[Red Hat Knowledgebase article] for more information.

Author: Hi @djuran . Thanks for the comment, so the following note can be removed from only the 4.15 docs? 

> For disk sizes larger than 100GB, and especially disk sizes larger than 1TB, create a separate `/var` partition. See "Creating a separate `/var` partition" and this link:https://access.redhat.com/solutions/5587281[Red Hat Knowledgebase article] for more information.

Issue persists in earlier versions (4.14 to 4.11)?

> For disk sizes larger than 100GB, and especially disk sizes larger than 1TB, create a separate `/var` partition. See "Creating a separate `/var` partition" and this link:https://access.redhat.com/solutions/5587281[Red Hat Knowledgebase article] for more information.

Reviewer 3: I'm not quite sure how to map CoreOS merges into OCP releases but at least 4.14.5 does *not* suffer from this issue, which suggests that note should be removed also for 4.14

> For disk sizes larger than 100GB, and especially disk sizes larger than 1TB, create a separate `/var` partition. See "Creating a separate `/var` partition" and this link:https://access.redhat.com/solutions/5587281[Red Hat Knowledgebase article] for more information.

Author: Thanks, @djuran . This would mean that I would have to make 4.12 and 4.13 updates in a separate PR. I'll target this PR for 4.14 and 4.15 so that I'll remove: 

> For disk sizes larger than 100GB, and especially disk sizes larger than 1TB, create a separate `/var` partition. See "Creating a separate `/var` partition" and this link:https://access.redhat.com/solutions/5587281[Red Hat Knowledgebase article] for more information.

> For disk sizes larger than 100GB, and especially disk sizes larger than 1TB, create a separate `/var` partition. See "Creating a separate `/var` partition" and this link:https://access.redhat.com/solutions/5587281[Red Hat Knowledgebase article] for more information.

Reviewer 2: OCP 4.12:
```
[akaris@workstation k8s (master)]$ oc get clusterversion
NAME      VERSION   AVAILABLE   PROGRESSING   SINCE   STATUS
version   4.12.30   True        False         29d     Cluster version is 4.12.30
``

```
[root@30-d0-42-da-54-80 ~]# xfs_info / | grep agcount
meta-data=/dev/sda4              isize=512    agcount=502, agsize=233599 blks
[root@30-d0-42-da-54-80 ~]# df -h /
Filesystem      Size  Used Avail Use% Mounted on
/dev/sda4       447G  225G  223G  51% /
```

> For disk sizes larger than 100GB, and especially disk sizes larger than 1TB, create a separate `/var` partition. See "Creating a separate `/var` partition" and this link:https://access.redhat.com/solutions/5587281[Red Hat Knowledgebase article] for more information.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps we should just target this for OCP 4.14, and I assume 4.13 as it's RHEL 9 as well, and ignore 4.12 for starters and have this discussion for the PR for that version - i.e., we can drop the sentence altogether for 4.14 (definitely) and 4.13 (very likely)

> For disk sizes larger than 100GB, and especially disk sizes larger than 1TB, create a separate `/var` partition. See "Creating a separate `/var` partition" and this link:https://access.redhat.com/solutions/5587281[Red Hat Knowledgebase article] for more information.

Author: Thanks, @andreaskaris . This would be possible but we need complete clarity that the note could be dropped  for 4.15, 4.14, and 4.13. Who can validate this? It seems that certain z-streams could still require the note, such as 4.14.6?

====
For disk sizes larger than 100GB, and especially disk sizes larger than 1TB, create a separate `/var` partition. See "Creating a separate `/var` partition" and this link:https://access.redhat.com/solutions/5587281[Red Hat Knowledgebase article] for more information.
====

* Kubernetes supports monitoring of the following two types of file system partitions: 
** `/var/lib/containers` in the same partition as `/var`. 

> ** `/var/lib/containers` in a separate partition from `/var`.

Reviewer 3: Much better!

====
For disk sizes larger than 100GB, and especially disk sizes larger than 1TB, create a separate `/var` partition. See "Creating a separate `/var` partition" and this link:https://access.redhat.com/solutions/5587281[Red Hat Knowledgebase article] for more information.
====

> * Kubernetes supports storing the containers directory on a separate disk. You must have a single filesystem for `/var`, so that you can use a separate partition for `/var/lib/containers`. Kubernetes supports only these two configurations. Kubernetes does not monitor any other type of file system partition.

Reviewer 4: I may have suggested this change but I find it a bit confusing..

```suggestion
* Kubernetes supports only two file system partitions.  You can either have a single filesystem for `/var` or you can have a dedicated filesystem for your container runtime.  One could use a separate partition for `/var/lib/containers`.  These are the only two supported ways to have Kubernetes monitor the filesystem.
```

Reviewer 4: Yes, so in this doc, we either support /var/lib/containers is on the same partition as /var.  Or you have a separate partition for /var/lib/containers.

It is also possible to change the location of /var/lib/containers via a crio-storage config change.  I will be working on a post to mention this as its not very well documented.

Author: Thanks, @kannon92 .

I updated the content. WDYT?

Reviewer 4: I think there is still a question on this comment.
